okay so the next topic that we're going
to talk about is machine translation
missing translation is one of the most
exciting areas of natural language
processing research so why is it
important well there are more than 7,000
languages in the world it turns out that
the majority of the documents however on
the web are in English as you can see
from this diagram about 55 percent are
in English and then you have small
segments in languages like Russian
German Spanish Chinese and French and
smaller percentages in other languages
so the remaining close to 7,000
languages have only 11% this is in stark
contrast with the number of Internet
users in the world so that second
diagram you can see that English and
Chinese speakers are for the majority of
Internet users followed by Spanish and
Japanese and so on and their percentage
for speakers of other languages in the
languages that are not in the top 10
goes up to 17% so since most of those
people speak only one or maximum of two
languages it is very common that they
would encounter a document on the web
that is in a language other than their
own so for that to be avoided we need to
come up with ways to translate text
automatically so this is exactly what
machine translation does so let me share
in our little picture this is a famous
painting by Pieter Bruegel the famous
painter from fifteen hundred and
sixty-three depicting the Tower of Babel
so there is a biblical story that says
that people were only speaking one
language at the time and then when they
built the Tower of Babel
God created all the different languages
so people couldn't talk to each other so
easily so we are trying to solve this
problem now by creating machine
translation systems okay so now let's
see how much in translation works so
most of the modern translation software
is based on statistics and I'm going to
show you as an example the support of of
a tostone which illustrates how
statistics can be used to translate
languages so case what the rosetta stone
looks like it has inscriptions in three
languages one of which is shown here
this is Egyptian and then at the top and
then Greek in the middle
this stone was carved in Egypt in 196 BC
and it was only deciphered by more
contemporary humans by shampo Leone in
1822 and the way he deciphered it was to
figure out that those texts even though
they were in different languages were
translations of one another and he was
able to figure out using some pattern
recognition or manual pattern
recognition which symbols in one of the
languages matched which symbols in the
other language so if you're interested
in the rosetta stone in more detail you
can go to this website and look at the
entire text and the alignments so here's
an octave problem that is very similar
to the rosetta stone in fact this
category of Poland's in naku is called
the Rosetta Stone problems it was
written by Simon's warts based on work
by Kevin Knight so here's what the
pollen looks like it is not about the
real human language although there is a
little twist to what I just said which
I'm going to explain in a few minutes so
instead we're going to focus on the
story described in this pollen
specifically that this is about our
children which is a intergalactic
language and you have come up with some
communication from foreign constellation
in this language and you know that each
sentence on the left is in Center
Centauri language and then it centers on
the right is in the current language and
now the question is can you figure out
which word in one of the languages
matches which word in this the other
language so how would you do this so I'm
going to let you think and you can do
this by looking at the next couple of
slides and then I'm going to show it the
answer so the specific task in Matthew
was to find individual words so for
example the word Farokh in centauri so
that word appears in two of the
sentences and then what you need to do
is to figure out which sentence is in
our current those correspond to and see
if there is one single word in those two
sentences that appears only in them and
not in any of the other sentences so you
can continue doing this for the other
sentences and get a words until you have
unique
translations and here's the solution it
turns out that even though those
languages were labeled as Centauri and
are kuren they in fact English and
Spanish and this is the example that was
using by Kevin might in 1997 to
introduce how machine translation works
so every word in English in Spanish was
translated into some made-up word in
those artificial languages and now you
can see that it makes more sense so for
example the word Garcia appears in both
languages English in Spanish
and since this is a person's name we can
use the principle that person names are
typically left untranslated so we can
figure out that the words boom in the
two languages is the same then you can
do this recursively until we figure out
the rest of the words okay it's the full
solution okay so you probably now have
an idea how much in translation or
statistical machine translation rather
works you need to have what is known as
parallel corpora so parallel corpus is a
text in one language that is aligned to
a text in another language that forms
its translation so there are many
instances of parallel corpora around
there the first one is the rosetta stone
which is obviously very short then days
data like the Hansard corpus so the
Hazards corpus is the Proceedings of the
Canadian Parliament which by law has to
keep all parliamentary proceedings in
both French and English which are
equally official so every time somebody
speaks in English there isn't a
translation done by humans in French and
vice-versa and since this is government
data it can be obtained very easily from
the handset website and most of the
early statistical machine translation
systems were trained using this kind of
data for French and English there are
many other parallel corpora available
for example news stories that are
translated in different languages user
manuals that a certain company publishes
so that people in different countries
can use their products one of the most
common data sets used for machine
translation training which is available
in thousands of languages is the
so let's look at some examples
the Hansard here's an english paragraph
two sentences and their translations in
french so i'll just give you an example
of words that are aligned here so
government in english appears as govern
limo in french so that's a fairly
straightforward example which also forms
a cognate or the two words have the same
historical connection and now the next
thing is Postmaster General which gets
translated as luminous the post or in
other words the Minister of posts so
that's not exactly the same translation
as Postmaster General but it means the
same person so you can see that even
though those documents refer to the same
person in both languages they may use
some very idiosyncratic vocabulary that
is not directly translatable so here's
one more example from a Bible paragraph
in English and it's translation in
Cebuano which is a language from the
Philippines so let's try to figure out
how we can translate those three words
God heaven and earth from English to
Cebuano so here's one pair of aligned
sentences then another one and then a
third one now we can use a lot of
information first of all step one is
spoken in the Philippines and the
Philippines Spanish used to be a
commonly spoken language so there are
some words in sip water that are
cognates so for example deals here if is
no Spanish you can immediately figure
out that it means God but that's not the
basic idea of statistical machine
translation what's more important is to
look at current statistics so we're
looking for words that appear in the
same sentences in both languages and
don't appear in any of the others so for
example here I'm going to let you pause
for a moment to figure this out can you
figure out what are the translations for
heaven and for earth just based on those
three examples so give some of the
information that you can use Corcoran's
in sentences word order is especially
among across languages that are
relatively similar to each other
which is probably not the case here and
also cognates which again is more useful
when the languages are related so you
need to have corpora of this nature that
are aligned at the sentence level if
those are not the line then the first
thing that you need to do for this
algorithm to work is to align them
automatically well if they are exactly
the same text alignment actually can be
done but if they are not exactly the
same text they may be just what is known
as comparable corpora then sent
assignment may be much trickier and
noisier but it is still possible to use
it and build translation systems purely
based on comparable corpora so here's an
octal problem that you can download
it's about language similarity you can
see how often you can identify cognates
among languages that are historically
related so you have the first sentence
of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights in 17 different languages then
you have to figure out which ones of
those are in the same language family
because they have very similar words so
the first 11 of them are shown on this
slide and two of the languages are
labeled as English in Latin and then you
have 6 more on the second slide so you
should pause here and look at the last
two slides and see if you can figure out
which of those languages belong to the
same family so the answer will be shown
next so here the seven clusters you can
look up the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights on the internet to figure
out which specific languages we have
here but they include languages like
Romanian and Italian and Basque and
Latvian and so on ok so now we're going
to stop for a moment and continue with
more techniques for machine translation